Improve documentation of `ObjectModel` (#1531)
PrestaShop/docs: development/components/database/objectmodel.md

---
title: ObjectModel class
useMermaid: true
---

# The ObjectModel class

## Introduction

> ObjectModel class is one of the main pillar of PrestaShop's legacy core. While a complete migration to Symfony/Doctrine entities is planned in the roadmap, ObjectModel will still remain present and available in our software for a while.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ObjectModel class is one of the main pillars of PrestaShop's legacy core. While a complete migration to Symfony/Doctrine entities is planned in the roadmap, ObjectModel will remain present and available in our software for a while.
```

ObjectModel is the Data Access Layer for PrestaShop, implemented following the Active Record pattern. The Data Access Layer (DAL) is a part (with the Database Abstraction Layer - DBAL) of the Object Relational Mapping (ORM) legacy system for PrestaShop.

> Read more about Object relation mapping (ORM), Database abstraction layer (DBAL), Data access layer (DAL), and Active Record :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read more about Object relation mapping (ORM), Database abstraction layer (DBAL), Data access layer (DAL), and Active Record:
```

- [Object relational mapping (ORM)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object%E2%80%93relational_mapping)
- [Database abstraction layer (DBAL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_abstraction_layer)
- [Data access layer (DAL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Data_access_layer)
- [Active record pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_record_pattern)

> A class extending ObjectModel class is tied to a database table. Its static attribute (`$definition`) is representing the model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A class extending the ObjectModel class is tied to a database table. Its static attribute (`$definition`) represents the model. 
```

> Its instances are tied to database records. The ObjectModel class provides accessors for each attribute defined in `$definition`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its instances are tied to database records. The ObjectModel class provides accessors for each attribute defined in the `$definition`. 
```

You still need to have property added to your entity. E.g.

```
class Foo extends ObjectModel
{
    public $someProperty = 'bar';
    ...
}
```

> When instancied with an `$id` passed to the class constructor, the attributes are retrieved in the related database (using the `$id` as the primary key to find the table record). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When instantiated with an `$id` in the class constructor, the attributes are retrieved from the related database record (using the `$id` as the primary key to find the table record). 
```

> When the `save()` method is called, ObjectModel will ask the DBAL to **insert** or **update** the object to database, depending if the `$id` is known or not in the ObjectModel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `save()` method is called, ObjectModel will ask the DBAL to **insert** or **update** the object to the database, depending if the `$id` is known or not in the ObjectModel.
```

I think that maybe you could do the overview of the structure and only then focus on specific methods.

> ObjectModel is also in charge of deleting an object in database (with its `delete()` method).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ObjectModel is also in charge of deleting an object in database (with its `delete()` method).
```

ObjectModel is full CRUD. I think we could say this instead of talking about specific responsibilities 👍

{{% notice info %}}

> An ObjectModel extended class can be overriden, but with extreme precaution : defining a wrong `$definition` model for example, can break the entire system, or can lead to data loss. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can override classes that extend ObjectModel, but with extreme precaution, e.g., defining a wrong `$definition` model can break the entire system or lead to data loss. 
```

{{% /notice %}}

## Create a new entity managed by ObjectModel

You can create a new entity (in a module for example), with its own database table, managed by ObjectModel. 

> To do this, extend you class with "ObjectModel" :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do this, create class extending the ObjectModel:
```

```php

> use PrestaShop\PrestaShop\Adapter\Entity\ObjectModel;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

we don't recommend using adapters

> class Cms extends ObjectModel {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
class Cms extends ObjectModel
{
```

}
```

> Next step is to define your model. [Defining the model]({{< ref "#defining-model" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step is [defining the model]({{< ref "#defining-model" >}}).
```

];
```

> Let's analyse this definition :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's analyse this definition:
```

```php
public static $definition = [
    'table' => 'cms',
    'primary' => 'id_cms',
    'multilang' => true,
    'fields' => array(
```

> - `table` is the related database table name (without the database table `PREFIX`, usually `ps_`), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `table` is the related database table name (without the database table `PREFIX`), 
```

- `primary` is the name of the `PRIMARY KEY` field in the database table, which will be used as `$id` in the ObjectModel
- `multilang` is a boolean value indicating that the entity is available in multiple langages, see [Multiple languages]({{< ref "#multiple-languages" >}})
- `fields` is an array containing all other of the fields from the database table.

### Fields description

> A field is defined by a key (its name in the database table) and an array of description of its settings. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A field is defined by a key (its name in the database table) and an array of its settings. 
```

```php
'meta_description' => [
    'type' => self::TYPE_STRING,
    'lang' => true,
    'validate' => 'isGenericName',
    'size' => 255
],
```

> In this example :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example:
```

- `validate` is a validation rule (optional)
- `size` is the max size of the field. It should match the database definition to avoid data cropping or overflow when inserting/updating objects.

#### Field types reference

Field type is an important setting, it determines how ObjectModel will format your data.

<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Type in ObjectModel</th>
            <th>Related type in MySQL</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_INT</td>
            <td>INTEGER, INT, SMALLINT, TINYINT, MEDIUMINT, BIGINT, ...</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_BOOL</td>
            <td>SMALLINT</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_STRING</td>
            <td>VARCHAR</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_FLOAT</td>
            <td>FLOAT, DOUBLE</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_DATE</td>
            <td>DATE</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_HTML</td>
            <td>BLOB, TEXT</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_NOTHING</td>

>             <td>Should not be used (avoids ObjectModel formating)</td>

Reviewer: I wouldn't say, "it should not be used". I'd go for something that is probably not secure and use it cautiously.

        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>TYPE_SQL</td>

>             <td>Should not be used</td>

Reviewer: it does escape the value with pSQL with `html` param as a true, I think it should be described differently

        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

#### Validation rules reference

Several validation rules are available for your ObjectModel fields. 
[Please refer to the Validate class of PrestaShop](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/8.0.x/classes/Validate.php) for a complete list.

## Basic usage of an ObjectModel managed entity

### Create and save a new object

```php
$cms = new Cms();
$cms->position = 2;
...
$cms->save();
```

In this example, we create an entity from scratch. Then, we set its `position` attribute, and we call the `save()` method. The `save()` method will trigger the `add()` method since its `id` attribute is not yet known (because the entity is not created in database).

> If the insert was successful, the ObjectModel class will set the id of the entity (retrieved from database). [Complete reference here](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/8.0.x/classes/ObjectModel.php#L572-L658).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the insert is successful, the ObjectModel class will set the entity's id (retrieved from the database). [Complete reference here](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/8.0.x/classes/ObjectModel.php#L572-L658).
```

### Load and save an object

```php
$id = 2; // id of the object in database
$cms = new Cms($id); 
$cms->position = 3;
...
$cms->save();
```

> In this example, we retrieve an entity from the database, with its id. Then, we change its `position` attribute, and we call the same `save()` method. The `save()` method will trigger the `update()` method and not the `add()` method since its `id` attribute is known. [Complete reference here](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/8.0.x/classes/ObjectModel.php#L750-L868).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we retrieve an entity from the database with its id. Then, we change its `position` attribute and call the same `save()` method. The `save()` method will trigger the `update()` method and not the `add()` method since its `id` attribute is known. [Complete reference here](https://github.com/PrestaShop/PrestaShop/blob/8.0.x/classes/ObjectModel.php#L750-L868).
```

### Hard or soft delete an object

> Two delete mecanisms are available with ObjectModel : hard delete and soft delete. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two delete mechanisms are available with ObjectModel: hard delete and soft delete. 
```

> Hard-delete deletes the record from the database, while soft-delete sets a flag to database indicating that this record is deleted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hard-delete deletes the record from the database, while soft-delete sets a flag in the table's field indicating that this record is deleted.
```

{{% notice info %}}
**Soft delete is not always available.**

> If the model object has no `deleted` property or no `deleted` definition field, a `PrestaShopException` will be thrown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the model object doesn't have a `deleted` property or there is no `deleted` field available in the class definition, a `PrestaShopException` will be thrown
```

{{% /notice %}}

{{% notice info %}}
**Soft delete does not trigger DeleteHooks.**

Soft deleting an object does not trigger **Delete** related hooks, but will trigger **Update** related hooks. [ObjectModel lifecycle hooks]({{< ref "#lifecycle-hooks" >}})
{{% /notice %}}

```php
$id = 2; // id of the object in database
$cms = new Cms($id); 
$cms->softDelete(); // sets the deleted property to true, and triggers an update() call
...
$cms->delete(); // triggers a DELETE statement to the DBAL
```

## Advanced usage 

### Multiple languages objects{#multiple-languages}

PrestaShop's ObjectModel can handle translations (also called internationalization, or i18n) of your objects.

> #### Under the hood : how does it work ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Under the hood: how does it work?
```

> When declaring a multi-language ObjectModel, PrestaShop will fetch another database table named like your base database table, with a suffix `_lang`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When declaring a multi-language ObjectModel, PrestaShop will fetch another database table named like your base database table, but with a suffix `_lang`
```

This table references the id of the base Object (`id_cms`), the id of the language (`id_lang`), and each translatable field. 

> In our previous example, for `Cms` ObjectModel :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our previous example, for `Cms` ObjectModel:
```

<div class='mermaid'>
classDiagram
    ps_cms <|-- ps_cms_lang
    ps_cms : id_cms
    ps_cms : id_cms_category
    ps_cms : position
    ps_cms : active
    ps_cms : ...
    class ps_cms_lang {
        id_cms
        id_lang
        meta_title
        meta_description
        meta_keywords
        link_rewrite
        content
        ...
    }
</div>

#### Translate your ObjectModel entity

> To do so, you must declare the `multilang` setting of your model definition to `true` :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, you must declare the `multilang` setting of your model definition to `true`:
```

```php
public static $definition = [
    ...
    'multilang' => true,
    ...
```

> And then, you must declare which ones of your fields are translated :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And then, you must declare which fields are available for translations:
```

```php
'fields' => array(
    ...
    'meta_description' => [
        ...
        'lang' => true,
        ...
    ],
    ...
)
```

> #### Accessors for Translatable ObjectModels{#multiple-language-accessors}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Accessors for translatable ObjectModels{#multiple-language-accessors}
```

Translatable fields are available in your ObjectModel as `array`. 

> In our example, to update the attributes `meta_title` for languages EN (`$lang_id=1`) and FR (`$lang_id=2`), use the following method :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our example, to update the attributes `meta_title` for languages EN (`$lang_id=1`) and FR (`$lang_id=2`), use the following method:
```

Reviewer: maybe it is somewhere further, but I don't see any mention that if you pass `$idLang` to the constructor you'll not have an array in the multi-lang properties

```php
$cms->meta_title[1] = "My awesome title";
$cms->meta_title[2] = "Mon fabuleux titre";
$cms->save();
```

### Multiple stores/shops objects{#multiple-stores}

PrestaShop's ObjectModel can handle multiple stores (or multi shop) ObjectModels.

> #### Under the hood : how does it work ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Under the hood: how does it work?
```

When declaring a multi-store ObjectModel, PrestaShop will fetch another database table named like your base database table, with a suffix `_shop`
This table is a pivot table referencing at least the id of the base Object (`id_cms`) and the id of the shop (`id_shop`). 

> In our previous example, for `Cms` ObjectModel :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our previous example, for `Cms` ObjectModel:
```

<div class='mermaid'>
classDiagram
    ps_cms <|-- ps_cms_shop
    ps_cms : id_cms
    ps_cms : id_cms_category
    ps_cms : position
    ps_cms : active
    ps_cms : ...
    class ps_cms_shop {
        id_cms
        id_shop
    }
</div>

#### Enable multi-shop for your entity

> To do so, you must declare the `multishop` setting of your model definition to `true` :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, you must declare the `multishop` setting of your model definition to `true`:
```

```php
public static $definition = [
    ...
    'multishop' => true,
    ...
```

#### Associate an object to a store

> You can associate an object to one or several stores with the `associateTo` method :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can associate an object to one or several stores with the `associateTo` method:
```

```php
$cms->associateTo(1); // associates the object to the store #1
...
$cms->associateTo([1, 2, 4]); // associates the object to the stores #1, #2 and #4
```

### Multiple stores/shops and languages objects{#multiple-stores-languages}

> PrestaShop's ObjectModel can handle both multiple languages and multiple shops entities. The entity `Category` is a good example of this case :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PrestaShop's ObjectModel can handle both multiple languages and multiple shop entities. The entity `Category` is a good example of this case:
```

- we need to translate a Category name for each language
- we may need to change the name of a Category for different shops

> #### Under the hood : how does it work ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Under the hood: how does it work?
```

When declaring a multi-store ObjectModel, PrestaShop will fetch another database table named like your base database table, with a suffix `_shop`
This table is a pivot table referencing at least the id of the base Object (`id_cms`) and the id of the shop (`id_shop`). 

In our previous example, for `Category` ObjectModel :

<div class='mermaid'>
classDiagram
    ps_category <|-- ps_category_lang
    ps_category <|-- ps_category_shop
    ps_category : id_category
    ps_category : position
    ps_category : active
    ps_category : ...
    class ps_category_lang {
        id_category
        id_shop
        id_lang
        additional_description
        ...
    }
    class ps_category_shop {
        id_category
        id_shop
    }
</div>

#### Enable multi language + multi shop for your entity

> To do so, you must declare the `multishop_lang` setting of your model definition to `true` :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do so, you must declare the `multishop_lang` setting of your model definition to `true`:
```

```php
public static $definition = [
    ...
    'multishop_lang' => true,
    ...
```

> And then, you must declare which ones of your fields are translated :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And then, you must declare which fields are available for translations:
```

```php
'fields' => array(
    ...
    'additional_description' => [
        ...
        'lang' => true,
        ...
    ],
    ...
)
```

> #### Loading or save a multishop_lang object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Loading or saving a multishop_lang object
```

> While languages are [accessible with accessors]({{< ref "#multiple-language-accessors" >}}), if you need to programatically retrieve an ObjectModel related to a particular shop (not the selected / current shop from Context), you need to change the method used to load an object :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While languages are [accessible with accessors]({{< ref "#multiple-language-accessors" >}}), if you need to programmatically retrieve an ObjectModel related to a particular shop (not the selected / current shop from Context), you need to change the method used to load an object:
```

```php
$targetShopId = 2;
$category = new Category(1, null, $targetShopId); // 1 is the id of the object
```

If you need to update a translatable field on your entity, you need to add a `Shop::setContext()` call before you save your object :

```php
$targetShopId = 2;
Shop::setContext(Shop::CONTEXT_SHOP, $targetShopId);

$category = new Category(1, null, $targetShopId);
$category->additional_description[1] = "Additional description for shop #2"; // language id #1, english
$category->additional_description[2] = "Description additionelle pour le shop #2"; // language id #2, french
$category->save();
```

### Duplicate an object

To duplicate an object, use the following method : `duplicateObject()`

```php
$cms = new Cms(2); 
$duplicatedCms = $cms->duplicateObject();
```

{{% notice info %}}
**duplicateObject will save the object to database.**

> Please note that `duplicateObject()` will instantly save the duplicated object to database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that the `duplicateObject()` method will instantly save the duplicated object to the database.
```

{{% /notice %}}

### Partial update of an object

> Since {{< minver v="8.x" >}}, a partial update mecanism is available in ObjectModel. This mecanism allows you to choose which attributes you want to update during the `update()` method call. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since {{< minver v="8.x" >}}, a partial update mechanism is available in ObjectModel. This mechanism allows you to choose which attributes you want to update during the `update()` method call. 
```

> On previous versions ({{< minver v="1.7.x" >}}, {{< minver v="1.6.x" >}}, ...), this method was already available but was not properly working.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On previous versions ({{< minver v="1.7.x" >}}, {{< minver v="1.6.x" >}}, ...), this method was already available but was not working properly.
```

> Example :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example:
```

```php
$cms = new Cms(2); 
$cms->position = 4;
$cms->active = 0;
$cms->setFieldsToUpdate(["position" => true]);
$cms->save();
```

> In this example, only the `position` will be updated. `active` (and all other fields) will not be updated in database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, only the `position` is updated, `active` (and all other fields) will not be updated in the database.
```
